es is the discovery of well-recorded and peculiar histories in the
commonplace small-sized rivers of our Atlantic slope. We have looked
for some years to the west as the region where river history should be
illustrated, because it was there that the pioneers in this branch of
study taught us the lessons on which our further work must depend. But
home study as well as distant travel has its rewards, and with the
progress of good topographic work on this side of the country we
confidently await much instruction from a close acquaintance with the
curious histories of many of our rivers which we know now only by name.

  Harvard College, January, 1890.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Supplementary Note_.--Professor Albrecht Penck of Vienna has published
a valuable essay on "Die Bildung der Durchbruchsthäler" (Verein zur
Verbreitung naturwissenschaftlicher Kenntnisse in Wien, 1888) from
which the following historical notes are taken to illustrate the
gradual overthrow of the fracture theory of cross valleys by the
introduction of the idea that rivers can sometimes cut down their beds
as fast as the land is uplifted or upfolded beneath them.

Ferd. Römer. Die jurassische Weserkette. Zeit. d. deutsch. geol.
Gesellsch., ix, 1857, 581. The deepening of valleys by rivers and
streams must keep pace with the gradual elevation of continental
masses. The Porta Westphalica has thus been cut by the Weser in the
Wiehen-Weser range, in the northeastern part of Westphalia.

A similar suggestion was briefly made a little later by Bischoff, to
explain the gorge of the Rhine below Bingen. Lehrb. d. chem. u. phys.
Geol., 2 Aufl., i, 374, 382; and again independently for the same river
by Dücker. Zeitschr. d. Gesellsch. f. Erdk. Berlin, v, 1870, 183.

Gümbel explained the course of the Altmühl, a branch of the Danube
which crosses the Frankish Jura in northwestern Bavaria, by supposing
its course was defined before and maintained during the deformation of
the range. Bavaria: Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern,
1865, iii, 756.

Medlicott recognized that many streams flowing from the inner Himalaya
are older than the outer ranges, and showed reason for believing that
they held their places while the outer ranges were tilted up. Mem.
Geol. Survey India, iii, 1865, 6, 122, 127, 157, 163. A little later,
he applied the same explanation to some Alpine rivers. The Alps and the
Himalayas, a geological comparison. Q. Journ. Geol. Soc., London, xiv,
1868, 47, 52.

Wynne explains the Indus and adjacent rivers as of greater age than the
elevation of the Salt Range in northwestern India. Mem. Geol. Survey
India, xi, 1875; xiv, 1878.

Rütimeyer recognized the possibility of uprising ranges being cut down
by transverse rivers, but regarded the occurrence as a rare one,
thinking that lakes would generally appear behind such a growing
barrier. He emphasized the idea that erosion works upstream, which Löwl
has later developed farther. Ueber Thal- und Seebildung, Basel, 1869; 2
Aufl., 1874.

Tietze regarded the persistence of rivers across growing ranges as the
rule rather than the exception. Die Bildung von Querthälern, Jahrb. d.
k. k. Geol. Reichsanst., 1878, 581.

Hayden was perhaps the first to point out in this country the
antecedent origin of certain headwaters of the Missouri in Montana,
where the mountain ranges are frequently cut across by deep cañons.
Amer. Journ. Science, xxxiii, 1862, 305. Hayden's Sixth Report, 1872
(1873), 85.

Reference may be made also to White, Hayden's Tenth Report, 1876
(1878), 52; Peale, id., 167; Bechler, id., 372. General discussion of
valley making is given by Green, Geology for students and general
readers, London, 1876; Hartung, Zeitschr. Gesellsch. f. Erdkunde,
Berlin, 1878, 308.

In spite of the early date of some of these essays, the idea of the
antecedent origin of rivers did not gain general recognition and
acceptance till it was strongly stated by Powell.




A CRITICAL REVIEW OF BERING'S FIRST EXPEDITION, 1725-30, TOGETHER WITH
A TRANSLATION OF HIS ORIGINAL REPORT UPON IT. With a Map.

BY WM. H. DALL.

CONTENTS.--Introductory remarks.--Instruments and Methods.--Sources of
information.--Translation of Bering's Report.--Bering's List of
Geographical Positions.--An Itinerary of the Expedition.--Annotated
Synopsis of the Voyage compiled from all accessible data.--Comparative
Table of Geographical Positions.--Resumé of the results of the
Expedition.


In 1648 the tide of exploration and adventure setting eastward through
Siberia, impelled the fitting out of seven small trading boats on the
Kolyma river. Three of these, in charge of Simeon Deshneff, Gerasim
Ankudinoff and Feodor Alexieff, respectively, reached Bering Strait.
Ankudinoff's boat was wrecked on East Cape, but his party was
accommodated on the others. There were hostilities with the Chukchi,
the two boats were separated, and Deshneff's alone finally reached
Kamchatka. Next year he constructed the trading post on the Anadyr
river subsequently known as Anadyrsk.

There is a tradition that in 1654 a trader named Taras Stadukin
followed Deshneff's route, made a portage across the neck of East Cape,
circumnavigated Kamchatka, discovered the Kurile Islands, and finally
reached the Gulf of Penjina in safety.

In 1711 an emissary named Peter Iliunsen Popoff was sent to East Cape
by the Russians to induce the Chukchi to pay tribute. In this he
failed, but brought back an account of islands beyond East Cape, and of
a continent reported by the Chukchi to exist beyond these islands. Some
statements which he made in regard to the people of this continent were
regarded by geographers of the last century as fictitious, but with our
better knowledge, they set the seal of authenticity upon Popoff's
report and show that his journey was really made.

The political disorders which prevailed in Western Russia about this
period, prevented any attention from being directed to the reports of
these explorations, which were preserved in the archives at Yakutsk.
Somewhat later the attention of geographers was directed toward this
unknown corner of the world and the subject was brought to the notice
of Peter the Great. He took great interest in it, drew up instructions
for an expedition with his own hand and delivered them to Count Apraxin
with orders to see them executed. A few days later, in January, 1725,
he died; but the Empress desiring to carry out all the plans of her
deceased husband as closely as possible, ordered their execution.
Fleet-Captain Vitus Ivanovich Bering was nominated to the command of
the expedition and Lieutenants Martin Spanberg[1] and Alexie Chirikoff
to be his assistants.

[Footnote 1: So spelled by Bering himself.]

This expedition forms the subject of this paper. It has been treated of
by various geographers and biographers, but so far the original report
of Bering, printed in 1847 in the Russian language, has never been
faithfully translated into any other language; while his map has never,
in its entirety, been published at all. Reduced sketches derived from
the maps and more or less mutilated and garbled versions of the report
have appeared in sundry collections of voyages, and upon these the
latest contributions to the history of the expedition have been in
great part based.

Believing that the original report is a document of sufficient historic
and geographic interest to be made accessible to those who do not read
Russian, and that the errors of existing works make a critical review
of the subject desirable, I have translated the document in question
and prepared a general review of the present state of our knowledge in
regard to the expedition.

Bering's Report being written in archaic and badly spelled Russian,
with a singular disregard of punctuation and other literary niceties,
the translation presented unusual difficulties, in solving which I have
had the kind coöperation of that excellent Russian scholar Mr. J.
Curtin. I am indebted to the Reverend Father Richards, president of
Georgetown University, and Father Maas of Woodstock College, Md., for
valuable information in regard to the church festivals and saints,
whose names were utilized in the nomenclature of Bering's new
discoveries. To Mr. Marcus Baker, Messrs. Gannett and Woodward, and Mr.
C. C. Darwin of the Geological Survey; Dr. S. Hertzenstein of the
Zoological Museum of the Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg; Baron
Nordenskiöld of Stockholm, and Baron Robert Klinckofström; Drs. Holm
and Stejneger of the U. S. National Museum, and Prof. Julius Olson of
Madison, Wisconsin, I am indebted for numerous favors and courteous
assistance, and to all of these gentlemen I desire to express my
thanks.

In conclusion I desire to state that I am well aware this paper cannot
be regarded as a finality, but as a contribution to the geographical
history of North America it will not be without its value, while the
fact that I have myself spent parts of three summers in scientific
exploration of the coast visited by Bering and first charted by him,
has greatly helped me in my discussion of minor details of his work.

[Illustration: BERING'S CHART OF HIS FIRST VOYAGE. FROM D'ANVILLES
ATLAS. 1737. The first published map of his Explorations.]


INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS.

In considering the work done by the expedition it is very necessary to
bear in mind the character of the instrumental outfit, if any, which
they might have possessed, and the state of the science of navigation
at the time.

When Bering and his two cartographers left St. Petersburg in February,
1725, the astronomical instrument in use by navigators was the Davis
quadrant or "backstaff," in which the sun's altitude was measured by
sighting without a telescope or tube on the shadow cast by the sun from
one projection of the instrument upon another, the observer's back of
course, being turned to the luminary. The only alternative to this was
the still older astrolabe with which the observer had to look along the
two lines of his angle at the same time, and which also depended upon
sights or spurs attached to a frame. The reflecting quadrant of Hadley
was not invented until 1731 and telescopes were not used on the
instruments of navigation until somewhat later. There were no
chronometers or reliable watches or clocks for use in dividing
intervals of time. Even after the Hadley quadrant came into use, time
was noted by a pendulum vibrating seconds, which could not be used on
ship-board.

A futile attempt had been made by means of tables of variation of the
compass to determine the longitude by comparison with observed
variation in the field. Results by this method approached the truth
accidentally, if at all. Lunar observations were the only means of
getting an approximation to the longitude except the occultations of
Jupiter's satellites, both methods being impracticable on board ship,
with the instruments then employed.

In 1731 the astronomer Halley proved[2] that at that date it was still
impossible to find the longitude correctly by the moon, the lunar
tables being so inaccurate that an error of several hundred miles was
quite possible and an accurate determination would depend upon the
respective errors of instrument, observation and the lunar tables
happening to balance one another. Halley ventured to express the hope
that the tables may be so amended that an error may scarce ever exceed
three minutes, which would correspond to a degree and a half of
longitude, amounting at the equator to a distance of a little less than
one hundred miles. Messerschmidt, who preceded Bering as an explorer of
Eastern Siberia, was according to Middendorf (Sib. Reise, iv. 1, p. 56)
thirty-two degrees out in his determination of the longitude, and the
eastward extent of Asia in this region was underrated by that amount or
thereabouts, on many maps.

[Footnote 2: Phil. Trans. 1731, No. 421.]

One other means of approximating to the meridian remained, in the
observation of eclipses. This from the comparative rarity of these
occurrences in the case of the sun and moon, could with the imperfect
instruments of those days be available but seldom. Owing to the
difficulty of determining the exact time of the first and last contacts
the longitudes computed by these observations were liable to quite as
great inaccuracy as those computed from the lunar tables. Still an
ordinary spyglass would enable an observer to note the time within a
minute or two, and, if he was possessed of the local time, a simple
comparison with the observed time of the eclipse in some locality where
the longitude was known would give a fairly good determination,
considering the instruments and methods of those days. Of the four
eclipses of the moon occurring in 1728-9 two might have been observed
without difficulty by Bering, one would have been invisible to him, and
one might barely have been noted, but in all probability was not
observed by him. In none of the published reports of the expedition is
any mention made by Bering or his officers of the occurrence or
observation of an eclipse, which seems very singular if by such an
observation he was enabled to correct an error of 30° in the longitude
of northeastern Siberia. However, Middendorf states (Sib. Reise, iv. 1,
p. 56) that "Bering and his lieutenant in the years 1728 and 1729
observed in Kamchatka[3] two eclipses of the moon," by which they
corrected the longitude. He gives no authority for this statement.

[Footnote 3: It is possible that an eclipse observed at Ilimsk in
Middle Siberia by Chirikoff is thus erroneously referred to.]

Euler, who had access to the archives of the Admiralty College, while
engaged on a Geography of Russia, mentions (Philos. Trans., No. 482, p.
421) that he was informed that Bering observed an eclipse "at
Kamchatka." This letter of Euler's is copied by Campbell in Harris'
Voyages (vol. II, Book III, p. 1024) and the expression "at Kamchatka"
has led to the statement that these observations were made at the fort
or village of Lower Kamchatka. This is an error since Bering gives no
longitude for the fort in his table of geographical positions. It must
be remembered that the name Kamchatka at that period was applied not
merely to the peninsula as at present, but also to the whole region of
northeastern Siberia, the governor of Kamchatka being located at
Okhotsk. So to come within the probable meaning of the phrases used by
Middendorf and Euler it is only necessary to suppose that the
observations were made somewhere in that region. Lauridsen (Danish
edition, note 34, p. 186) refers to a paper of Struve (Bull.
phys.-math. Acad. St. Petersb., I, 1842, p. 290) containing a table of
geographical positions in Russia, in connection with these alleged
observations of Bering. An examination of Struve's paper does not bear
out the implication of Lauridsen's reference, as Struve not only makes
no mention whatever of Bering's observations there but specifically
states that the first observations of precision made in this part of
Siberia were those of Krassilnikoff who accompanied Bering's second
expedition in 1741. It would seem extraordinary that a determination so
important for geography as that of Bering and his companion should be
unknown to so distinguished an astronomer as Struve who must have had
access to all the archives of the early explorations by Russia. But it
may be perhaps accounted for by the facts that Bering's observations
were necessarily of a very rough and primitive character--as it is
certain he had no instruments of precision; and that, for that reason,
they were not received with entire confidence; so that Struve may have
considered them insufficiently exact to be included with those of
Krassilnikoff and others made with more modern appliances.

From the note in regard to the eclipses which is kindly contributed by
Mr. Marcus Baker and from the other circumstances, it is evident that
if Bering and his party made the observations alluded to, the eclipses
noted were the partial eclipse of Feb. 25 (local calendar), 1728, of
which he might have observed the last contact, or the total eclipse of
Feb. 14, 1729, of which he might have observed the first contact and
the totality. At the time of the last eclipse he was at Lower Kamchatka
post, and as, in the list of positions handed in with his Report in
1730, no longitude is entered for this locality, it would seem that
choice is reduced to the first of the two mentioned; which occurred
when Bering was either at Bolsheretsk or on his way from that place to
Lower Kamchatka, which he reached about a month later. Campbell's table
of positions is credited by him to the year 1728, but my own opinion is
that it was really derived (with various errors, interpolations, etc.)
from Bering's table of 1730.

The ordinary method of getting the longitude of a place, and that upon
which Bering originally depended, as his itinerary table shows, was by
a continuous record of the distances and directions traveled from a
point of known longitude. This record would afford the data from which
the distance on a mean parallel, by means of a traverse table, could be
computed. Laborious, imperfect, and slow as it was, it was the only
sure reliance of the traveler in those days. Whether Bering observed an
eclipse or not, it is certain that his original dependence was upon his
itinerary, that his report was based upon that and that this part of
his work was done as well as the nature of the method would permit. His
silence about the eclipse may be due to the fact that he depended not
upon astronomical but upon pedometric observations, to which the
eclipse may have afforded some corrections. At any rate the pedometric
determination of the distance between Tobolsk and Okhotsk or the
peninsula of Kamchatka was in itself a tremendous undertaking.

I find by a rough calculation from Bering's data that the longitude
resulting from his itinerary from Tobolsk to Okhotsk is 77° 36' E. The
distance in a straight line is about 2,390 miles, but by the route
Bering traveled the distance is a little more than 3,746 miles. The
longitude in Bering's List of Positions is 76° 07', which differs from
the pedometric measurement by 1° 29' (or about 45 miles). On Bering's
map, Okhotsk is located in longitude 74° 30' E. of Tobolsk, while the
most modern observations for Okhotsk put it in 142° 40' E. of Greenwich
or 75° 40' E. of Tobolsk. So that Bering's pedometric measurement was
nearly 60 miles in excess; his revised table (as corrected by the
eclipse?) 27 miles in excess; and his map about 30 miles in error in
the opposite direction. These discrepancies show the inexactness of the
methods then in vogue and also that the pedometric method was not very
much worse than the others in its results. Although there are several
typographic or other errors in his table of itinerary which render
exact comparisons impossible, it may be said that the error of the
pedometric method, including the passage by sea from Okhotsk to
Kamchatka, averages about two degrees or sixty geographical miles. In
the cases of Okhotsk and Bolsheretsk the error is one of excess; in the
case of the cape at the mouth of the Kamchatka river and of the turning
point of the expedition north of Bering Strait, the result is too small
by about the same amount.

That his chart and his revised list of positions should differ as they
do, is quite as likely the result of the careless way in which the
minutiæ of such work were generally regarded at that day, as to any
difference of date, or of intentional modification.

To conclude our review of the instrumental means and methods then in
use, it may be said that the compasses in use at that day were
comparatively roughly made and more or less inaccurate. The variation
was determined in a given latitude by the azimuth of the Polestar or
the sun at setting observed by means of sights attached to the rim of
the compass, which was a method accurate enough for the general
purposes of navigation. The distance run was measured on shipboard by
the log which was in about the same form and perfection as at present,
being a very ancient invention.

The survey of a general coast-line was made by compass bearings on
prominent points, repeated from successive stations, the distances of
the ship's course being determined by the log and the courses by
compass, with corrections for current and the variation. The lines thus
obtained were checked by latitude observations made with Davis'
backstaff when the weather permitted.

Apart from any of the methods mentioned it seems to have been
overlooked that Bering might have corrected the longitudes of the N.E.
Siberian coast by the ordinary dead reckoning kept on board his vessel,
provided he started by adopting the longitude for the southern part of
Kamchatka peninsula which was in common use on many of the charts of
his day. Though it is true that the maps of that part of Siberia north
and northeast from the Okhotsk sea were many degrees in error in the
longitude, this observation does not hold good in regard to the
southern end of Kamchatka. The work of the Jesuit fathers in China had
already determined fairly well the position of China and Korea, while
rude outlines of the northern islands of Japan, Sakhalin, the Kuriles
and the south end of Kamchatka, were added to these on maps of Asia.
The outlines are often very incorrect but it is quite evident what is
intended. In nearly all early maps of this region which I have been
able to consult, as for instance those of N. de Witt, I have found the
south end of Kamchatka in approximately correct longitude. For
instance, in the Novissimae Ephemerides of Manfredio, published at Bonn
the same year that Bering left St. Petersburg, and which might well
have been sent to him before he sailed, we find two charts of the paths
of solar eclipses (Plates ii and iii). On these charts the meridian of
180° from Ferro passes across what is unmistakably the south end of
Kamchatka, though northeastern Siberia remains a blank. This would be a
sufficient starting point and is quite as correct as Bering's
determinations; in fact is within a few miles of the modern longitudes
for the same part of the peninsula. Dead reckoning along the shores of
the peninsula, corrected by latitude observations, would have done all
that was necessary to correct the meridian without observing any lunar
eclipse, provided the surveyor started with such an assumption as
Manfredio's or De Witt's charts supply.


SOURCES OF INFORMATION.

The general History of China [etc.] Done from the French of P[ere]. Du
Halde [by R. Brookes]. London, John Watts, 1736. 4 vols. 8° with maps
and ills.

This is referred to in the following text by the letter B.


This is the first English translation from the original French edition
of the "Description géographique et historique de l'empire de la Chine"
by the father J. B. Du Halde, published at the Hague in the same year
as the above translation. The text of the original French I have not
been able to consult, though, so far as Bering's voyage is concerned,
there does not seem to have been any material abridgment in the
translation above cited, for an opportunity of consulting which I am
indebted to the Librarian of Congress.

The maps and charts of the original French edition were separately
printed in an atlas by themselves, for the use of those who might
desire to do without the text, under the following title:


Nouvel Atlas de la Chine, de la Tartarie Chinoise, et du Thibet:
contenant Les Chartes générales & particulieres de ces Pays, ainsi que
la Carte du Royaume de Corée; (etc.): Rédigées par M^r D'Anville,
Géographe ordinaire de sa Majesté très Chrétienne, Précedé d'une
description de la Boucharie, Par un Officier Suedois que a fait quelque
sejour dans ce Pays. A la Haye, chez Henri Scheurleer MDCCXXVII. Folio,
12 pp. 42 charts.


The chart of Bering forms sheet 42, and differs from the others in
being on Mercator's projection which indicates that it was copied
directly from an original as stated in the text, and not redrawn. It is
20-3/4 by 9-3/8 inches on the neat-lines and is entitled:


"Carte des Pays traversé par le Cap^{ne}. Beerings depuis la ville de
Tobolsk jusqu'a Kamtschatka."


Beneath the title is a table of four transliterated Russian terms for
fort, post, village and convent, with their French equivalents. This
and certain peculiarities in the transliteration of proper names make
it certain that the original chart was in Russian and that the
transliteration was done by some one not perfectly familiar with both
languages. There are a few errors of the engraver in rendering single
letters "c" appearing for "t" and "r" for "e" in a few places. The
longitude is reckoned in degrees east from Tobolsk to which 67° degrees
when added will give practically the meridian east from Greenwich. The
transcriber of the map from the Russian appears to have been a Dane, G.
Kondet.

That part of this chart east from 112° E. Gr. has been fairly
reproduced by Lauridsen (Chart I) with the omission of some unimportant
names and the addition of a signature (not the ordinary autograph) of
Bering. This is reproduced with a different running headline to
accompany Olson's translation.


The fourth volume of Brookes' translation (pp. 429-440) contains

"A succinct narrative of Captain Beerings's Travels into Siberia:"


with a reduction of the above-mentioned map, on which there is no trace
of the island of St. Demetrius, even its name, which alone appears on
the Du Halde map, is here omitted. Otherwise this version of the map
does not differ from Du Halde's, more than one copy of a drawing
usually differs from another. When Bering started on his expedition he
was accompanied by two cartographers (Bergh, First Voy. of the Russ.
pp. 2-5, fide Lauridsen) Luzhin and Potiloff, and to one or both of
them under Bering's direction the construction of the map in question
was probably due.

When Bering made his report it was accompanied by a list of positions
for important places visited by the Expedition.

Dr. Campbell, while gathering material for his second edition of
Harris' Voyages, procured a copy of this unpublished list of positions
and prints it in his account of Bering's travels, with the comment that
it was sent by Bering from Kamchatka, before his return to Russia, and
to the Senate at St. Petersburg, to which Bering did not report.
Whether due to the transcriber or the printer there are several very
obvious errors in the list as printed by Campbell, and when it is
compared with Bering's own list we see that there are also several
interpolations.

But the positions adopted in the chart, said by Du Halde to have been
brought to St. Petersburg by Bering on his return (a statement
confirmed by the mention of a chart in the report itself), are not
identical with the positions enumerated in the list. This leads to the
suspicion that Bering's first chart was not published, and that the
chart issued was due to a recomputation and revision of his data. This
suspicion is made stronger by the statement of Lauridsen, who gives no
authority, however, that Bering's chart was made in Moscow in 1731,[4]
though this may merely mean that some of the copies which were
distributed to various personages were so prepared.

[Footnote 4: Lauridsen, Am. ed., p. 57.]

These manuscript copies of the chart and report were sent to various
foreign courts, as a matter of general interest, by the Russian
authorities. The copy used by Du Halde was communicated to him by the
King of Poland who had received it as a "Present worthy of his regard
and curiosity" (Du Halde, iv, p. 439, Brookes' ed.). Other copies were
sent to Sweden and probably to England and other countries. In the
journal, "Ymer," of the Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography
(1884, p. 93) is a short notice by E. Dahlgren of three manuscript
copies of Bering's chart of his first expedition, or rather of charts
embodying its results. Two of these charts are in the Royal archives of
Sweden and measures 58 x 135 cm. One of them is ornamented with ten
colored drawings of natives of Siberia. The other is without these but
does not seem to be a copy of the first as it has a number of soundings
between St. Lawrence and the Diomede Islands which are not on the
former, and some names which are peculiar to it. Both have many more
names than are given on the chart published by Du Halde. Both of the
manuscripts have a legend referring to the coast from the Kolyma
eastward, on the north coast of Siberia, to the effect that it is put
down from older charts and information, doubtless furnished by the
archives at Yakutsk. The third copy is in the possession of Baron
Robert Klinckofström, of Stafsund, Sweden.

Through the kind offices of Baron Nordenskiöld and the generosity of
Baron Klinckofström, the last mentioned chart has been forwarded to the
writer through the Smithsonian Institution for examination. It appears
to be essentially the same as the second of the two charts referred to
as comprised in the Royal Swedish Archives. The result of my
examination of it leads me to the belief that there were two different
charts sent out in manuscript by the Russian authorities. The first,
which I regard as the earlier, and which is certainly more accurate,
shows the island of St. Demetrius in its proper place in accordance
with Bering's Report and list of positions. It formed the basis of
Campbell's engraving which will be referred to later, and of the chart
which appears in the various editions of Du Halde. It is possible that
this represents the original chart prepared by Bering in Kamchatka
during the winter of 1728-9. The second and probably later form of the
chart is represented by the Klinckofström chart, upon which the name
and island of St. Demetrius have vanished and a smaller island in the
corresponding latitude is represented close to the Siberian coast and
westward from the meridian passing through the eastern extreme of East
Cape. This island is named the island of St. Diomede. If it is intended
as a revised position for the island of St. Demetrius of the other
chart and of Bering's Report, it is in conflict with the facts and with
the position assigned to St. Demetrius in the report. No one who had
sailed between St. Demetrius and East Cape could have sanctioned such a
position for the island with honesty. If a different island is intended
the question arises, Why is St. Demetrius omitted? This second chart is
obviously the basis upon which in D'Anville's chart of Asia (1753) the
configuration of the eastern extreme of Siberia is based, and I suspect
that the chart of the Imperial Academy of Sciences at St. Petersburg
and the reproduction of Jefferys, were also derived from it as far as
this region is concerned.

It would be rash, in the absence of authentic information which only
the Russian archives can supply, to hazard an opinion as to the origin
of the important difference between these charts. I may return to this
point later. Apart from this, it may be added that the northern coast
of Siberia from East Cape west to Cape Shelagskoi is represented as
mountainous throughout its extent. A legend states that it is laid down
from older charts and information. This relieves Bering from the
responsibility for the fictitious or at least grossly erroneous and
exaggerated form and direction given to Cape Shelagskoi on his chart.
The west coast of the Okhotsk sea and part of its northeastern shores
not visited by Bering are stated to be laid down from "information."
This map is not dated and the blank space in the title left for
Bering's autograph has never been filled. No name of draughtsman or
place or authority of issue are indicated upon it. It measures 51 by
20-1/8 inches between the neat-lines. It is in black and white, the
mountains washed in, the only color being small green trees as a
conventional sign for wooded country. A copy of the earlier chart fell
into the hands of Dr. Campbell and was published by him in his edition
of Harris' Voyages,[5] together with a version of the report which is
more or less mutilated and to which the editor to make his book more
readable has added certain flowers of rhetoric which detract from its
accuracy. Campbell's copy of the map is the most perfect yet published
and the only one showing the island of St. Demetrius in its proper
place.

[Footnote 5: HARRIS, JOHN. Complete collection of Voyages and travels
[etc.]. London, T. Woodward [and others] 1748. 2 v. folio, maps and
plates, Vol. 2, pp. 1016-1041, is devoted to a discussion of Bering's
discoveries, entitled: Book III, Section VIII. "A distinct account of
part of the northeast frontier of the Russian Empire, commonly called
the country of Kamschatka or Kamschatska including the voyages of
Captain Behring for discovering toward the East [etc.], collected from
the best authorities both printed and manuscript."]

In Du Halde's copy and those derived from it the eastern border of the
chart has cut off the island, though in some of them, as in that of
1736, the name remains. The only fault to be noted in Campbell's
edition of Bering's map is the omission by the engraver of the small
bay named Preobrazhenia by Bering and which, though it is not named,
appears on the other editions of the map. The title is as follows:


"An exact chart of all the countries through which Cap^t. Behring
travelled, from Tobolski Capital of Siberia to the country of
Kamtschatka."


The size of the map is 7 x 12¾ inches. It extends on the east to the
meridian of 126° east from Tobolsk which enables the "Isle of St.
Demetrius" (our present Big Diomede) to appear in its proper place. The
editions previously reported have all stopped at the 124th meridian,
thus cutting off the island, whose name sometimes appeared and
sometimes did not.

It will be observed that Dr. Campbell in this paper was the means of
introducing the erroneous and obnoxious Germanized spelling of Bering's
name into English literature. This is a pretty good indication that he
had no autographic documents from Bering himself, and that his
manuscripts were obtained from German sources, or at least had been
transcribed into the German language. In his thorough search of the
literature of the subject and lengthy discussion of the results, Dr.
Campbell undoubtedly gathered the fullest account of the first
expedition which had up to that date been printed. In order to enliven
his history of the proceedings, the good Doctor occasionally rises to
flights of fancy, and the theories he held were long since proved
erroneous.

There are several other English translations of Du Halde's China, of
which the following is the most important:


"A description of the empire of China and Chinese-Tartary, together
with the kingdoms of Korea, and Tibet: containing the geography and
history (natural as well as civil) of those countries. From the French
of P. J. B. Du Halde, Jesuit. Illustrated with general and particular
maps, and adorned with a great number of cuts. With notes geographical,
historical and critical, and other improvements, particularly in the
maps, by the Translator." London, Edward Cave, 1741. 2 vols. folio,
maps and ills.


This edition does not show the name of the translator, but he was
evidently a man of no small attainments as a geographer and
cartographer, and introduced numerous improvements and corrections into
the charts of D'Anville, which accompanied the original edition of Du
Halde. A copy of this was presented to the library of Harvard College
by the province of New Hampshire in 1765-6, for an opportunity of
examining which I am indebted to the courtesy of Mr. Justin Winsor, the
Librarian.

The text of this edition, compared with that of 1736, is as much as
possible abridged, yet contains nothing not in the original, but the
map exhibits certain additions to be noted. This map is entitled,


"A Map of Capt. Beerings' travels from Tobolskoy to Kamchatka between
y^e years 1725 and 1730. With improvements by y^e Editor." It contains
the following note by the editor. "Capt. Beerings probably observ'd y^e
Lat.^d in y^e Principal places thro' w^{ch} he pass'd, tho' two
Observations only are mentioned in his Journal. But M^r Kyrilow in his
Map of the Russian Empire does not follow y^e Author in this respect
for instance he places Ilimski 1° 30' more north, Yakutskoy 2° more
south, and Cape Chiokotskago 1° more south than Cap^t. Beerings;
likewise other places in Proportion. I have reckon'd y^e Long^d of
Tobolskoy from Paris according to an Eclipse of y^e Sun observed at
Hamburg and Tobolskoy, mentioned by Mr. Strahlenberg in his account of
y^e Northern parts of Europe and Asia. This is all that can be done
till y^e return of y^e Russian Mathematicians sent to make observations
and discoveries throughout Siberia." Then follows a line "Inscribed to
Francis Gashrey Esq^r."


The main body of the chart is that of Du Halde's original and the scale
is the same, but the height of the neat-lines is only 8-5/8 inches.
Bering's track from Okhotsk to Bolsheretsk, across Kamchatka, northward
to 67° 18'; also his track eastward from Kamchatka in 1729 and around
the peninsula to Bolsheretsk and Okhotsk; are indicated by dotted
lines. The two latitudes noted in Bering's journal are indicated on
this map by a +, and the northern one is placed near the Asiatic coast
in latitude 118° E. from Tobolsk. At the top of the map the supposed
Paris meridians[6] are indicated, a difference between Paris and
Tobolsk being assumed of 70° degrees, which is about five degrees too
much. There are also sundry infelicities in the transliteration of the
names from the French of D'Anville.

[Footnote 6: In the Campbell map these are taken as east from London
with an allowance of 67° between London and Tobolsk.]

A chart which deserves notice, though almost wholly fictitious, being
chiefly devoted to the spurious discoveries of the alleged Admiral de
Fonte, was issued by J. N. de L'Isle with the concurrence of M. P.
Buache, or at his suggestion. It appeared at Paris, in 1752, and was
copied for Jefferys' (2d) edition of Voyages from Asia to America in
1764. I do not know if this copy appeared in the first edition, but
presume it did.

For present purposes the interesting features of this map are as
follows:

Opposite the eastern extreme of the Chukchi peninsula there is
represented part of America with the legend, "Terres vues par Mr.
Spanberg in 1728, frequentées à présent par les Russes, qui en
apportent de très belles fourrures." In the English edition the legend
is "Seen by Spanberg 1728." Four islands are represented in the strait
between Asia and America, corresponding in a general way to the four
now known to exist there. Connected with America and north of the
Chukchi peninsula is land with an island off it corresponding not badly
to Wrangell and Herald Islands, and marked "Discovered in 1722." It is
possible that this land is a hypothetical compound of the land reported
by the Chukchis east of the strait with that which they knew to be
visible in clear weather from Cape Yakan, more or less confused
accounts of which had long been current among persons interested in
these regions.

The next chart of note in this connection was published by D'Anville,
the royal geographer of France, who had previously prepared the
original map of Bering for publication. He issued a general map of
Asia, in three parts, each of two leaves which could be joined
together, of which the first part appeared in 1751 and the third part
in 1753, entitled:


Troisième Partie de la Carte/d'Asie,/contenant/La Sibérie/et quelques
autres parties/de la Tartarie,/Publiée sous les Auspices de
Monseigneur/Louis-Philippe d'Orléans/Duc d'Orléans/Prémier Prince du
Sang./Par le S^r. d'Anville,/Sécrétaire de Son Alt^s.
Sereniss^s./MDCCLIII./Avec Privilége./


This map is in two sheets (each 20 x 21 inches), the engraving of the
geographical part by Guill. de la Haye and of the ornamental title by
De Lafosse. The longitude is reckoned from Ferro, and the map is
constructed on a scale of 23 French leagues to 60 geographical miles.
The boundaries are colored and the sea shore shaded with short
horizontal lines. It is on the polyconic projection.

This map includes many of the additions to geography in eastern Siberia
which were due to the members of the great Siberian expedition. The
courses and branches of the rivers especially were augmented and
corrected as well as named. The branches of the Anadyr River were
represented and named, but as no new information in regard to the coast
had been received at that date, this river was still mapped as entering
the sea to the south and west of Cape Thaddeus, as erroneously laid
down by Bering, who confounded with the Anadyr a small river which does
come in here, and passed the estuary of the true Anadyr without seeing
it. The coast lines are essentially those of Bering. Beyond the basins
of the Kolyma and Anadyr is marked "Terre inconnue"; a small supplement
in the north-east corner of the map, on half the scale of the map,
represents the north-east extreme of Asia as delineated by Bering. This
little supplement is of considerable interest as it gives fuller
information than that which appears on the original publication of Du
Halde, perhaps from a more modern version of Bering's chart, as
previously suggested.

Several names appear for the first time in cartographic history, upon
this map. Preobrazhenia Bay; Bolshoia River falling into Holy Cross
Bay, and the "Isle de St. Diomide" are among these. The Island of St.
Demetrius is omitted, as well as its name. The Island of St. Diomide is
placed about on a line between East Cape and Cape Chukotski, to the
westward of the meridian of East Cape. There is a discrepancy averaging
about five minutes in latitude and longitude between the positions on
this map and those on the second version of the Bering manuscript
charts. But in the main these differences are, I suspect, merely due to
carelessness in copying, and the general harmony between the two leads
to the belief that the D'Anville outline for this region was based on
the second version of the manuscript.

The differences of position for points on this part of the coast are
numerous. I have noted them in the comparative table of positions
herewith. They may be chiefly owing to slips in transferring from the
Mercator to the Polyconic projection; but some of them are due to new
information, probably derived from the surveyors of the second
expedition. Bering island appears on the map, in about its proper
place, though Copper island is not indicated, nor are any of the
Aleutians shown. I suspect this is the first publication of a
cartographic kind on which Bering island is laid down, as the map of
the Imperial Academy of Sciences, embodying the geographical results of
Bering's Voyage to the coast of America, was not engraved until a year
later, while De L'Isle's of 1752 does not contain them.

The island between Cape Shelaginski and East Cape off the northern
coast, on Bering's map, is omitted by D'Anville. The Kamchatkan
peninsula in latitude 56° is represented to have a width of 180 miles,
while Bering made it 270 miles.

A most important contribution to the subject appeared in Müller's
Historical Collections known as the "Sammlung Russische Geschichte" and
published at St. Petersburg (Kayserl. Academie der Wissenschaften,
1732-64. 8°. Nine volumes.) Des dritten Bandes (erstes, zweytes und
drittes Stück, pp. 1-304, 1758) contains the original account of the
Russian Voyages toward America from which the work of Jefferys has,
with some errors and omissions, been translated. As far as regards
Bering's first voyage, there is only one error of consequence made by
Jefferys, which will be noted in its place. This book is extremely
rare, and the only copy in America which I have been able to find after
much enquiry, is in the library of the Smithsonian Institution.

The first volume of this series has the title


"Eröffnung eines Vorschlages zu Verbesserung der Russischen Historie
Durch den Druck eines Stückweise herauszugebenden Sammelungen von
allerly zu den Umstanden und Begebenheiten dieses Reichs gehorigen
Nachrichten. St. Petersburg, bey der Keyserl. Academie der
Wissenschaften, 1732."


The succeeding volumes have the running title "Sammlung Russische
Geschichte" with the number of the parts subjoined but no other
title-page.

The account of the Russian Voyages is stated by Müller to have been
prepared at the direction of the Empress and endorsed by the Academy of
Sciences. It contains invaluable material on the early explorations,
which, if it had not been for Müller's painstaking researches, would
have been totally lost, as the archives of Yakutsk from whence the data
were derived by Müller were subsequently destroyed by fire. The errors
which occur in it are chiefly due to Müller's endeavor to utilize the
inexact geographical data of the Promyschleniks and Cossacks by
combining them with the less detailed but more precise observations of
later observers. In this attempt he added many valuable details to the
charts, but at the same time introduced several errors. The exaggerated
distances reported by the first explorers who were unable to correct
their estimates by observations of precision, distort those parts of
the map due to their reports. The peninsula of Aliaska becomes hugely
exaggerated as does the Shelagskoi promontory on the Arctic Sea. But no
unprejudiced person can read Müller's account without perceiving his
great caution in accepting unreservedly these imperfect contributions,
the really important additions which he made to cartography, the
preciousness of the facts which he rescued from oblivion, and his
desire to be fair to everybody.

The insinuations of malice and of a desire to injure Bering by means of
this account given by Müller, which Lauridsen attributes to the latter,
appear to be entirely the product of a suspicious temperament and an
excited imagination. Certainly I have seen nothing anywhere cited which
lends to such suspicions any tint of probability. The facts cited in
support of them can easily be otherwise explained, if one desires to
view the subject judicially, and for the most part are not quite
thoroughly understood by the Danish author.

One error upon which the latter lays great stress, is due to a
manipulation of the record, originated or at least adopted by Bering
himself, and which is incorporated in the map and report which all
authors agree proceeded directly from Bering's own hand.

The next map of importance was issued by the Imperial Academy of
Sciences, St. Petersburg in 1754. It was made under the inspection of
Gerhard Friedrich, Staatsrath von Müller, who revised and corrected it
subsequently, when an edition dated 1758 was issued. This map comprised
the geographical results of the great Siberian expedition sent out by
the Russian government; of Bering's voyages; and of the records of the
hunters (Promishleniks) and traders in northeastern Siberia preserved
in the archives of Yakutsk. The sources of this map are fully explained
by Müller in the "Russian Discoveries" (Jefferys' translation, p. 108
et seq.). I have not been able to examine a copy of the original map,
and have therefore relied on the English version of it which is to be
found in Jefferys' translation, second edition, London, 1764.

Among the improvements introduced on this map may be specified, the
correction of the shores of the Okhotsk Sea, and Gulf of Penjina, the
correcter location of the mouth of the Anadyr river and its estuary,
the introduction of the results of the voyages of Gvosdeff, Bering and
Chirikoff to the northwest coast of America, and a multitude of details
relating to northeastern Siberia. The island of St. Deomid (Diomede) is
not represented though its name appears on the 65th parallel in Bering
Strait. The island may have been on the original map and carelessly
omitted by Jefferys' engraver on his copy. Among the errors, or rather
mistaken hypotheses of others, which are suggested in this map by
dotted lines, are the extension westward to 174° E. of Greenwich, of
the peninsula of Aliaska which is also given a wholly uncalled-for
width; and the northward extension of the coast on each side of Bering
Strait. In the former case the cartographer was misled by the errors of
the map of Bering and Chirikoff's last voyage and rumors reported by
other navigators; and in the second case he followed Bering in adopting
an erroneous position and exaggerated form for the coast eastward from
Koliuchin Bay, due to the uncorrected sketches of the Cossacks and
traders. The northern extension of the American coast opposite, was
purely hypothetical and for this Müller must be held responsible. Many
of the western Aleutians are exaggerated in size and erroneous in
position but the chart of Bering's last voyage, and the exaggerated
reports of the hunters who followed him, must be held responsible for
this, in the main.

The work in which this chart appears is largely derived from Müller's
"Sammlung russische geschichte," St. Petersburg, 1758, vol. iii, Parts
I-III (cf. antea). The first edition is entitled, according to
bibliographies:


"Voyages from Asia to America for completing the discoveries of the
northwest coast of America. A summary of voyages made by the Russians
on the frozen sea. From the high Dutch of S[taatsrath]. Muller by T.
Jefferys. London: T. Jefferys, 1761." lxvi, 76 pp. 4°, with four maps.


The second edition which is that referred to in this paper is entitled


"Voyages from Asia to America, for completing the discoveries of the
northwest coast of America. To which is prefixed, a summary of the
Voyages made by the Russians on the Frozen Sea, in search of a
northeast passage. Serving as an explanation of a map of the Russian
discoveries, published by the Academy of Sciences at Petersburgh,
[etc.] London: T. Jefferys, 1764," viii, 120 pp. 4°, four maps.


A French translation by Dumas, with the author's initials misprinted G.
P. instead of G. F., was printed at Amsterdam in 1766. It consisted of
two volumes, 18mo, with a map. A Danish translation, by Morten
Hallager, was issued at Copenhagen in 1784, as a portion of a volume
relating to northern explorations. Bibliographers seem to have been
puzzled by the discrepancy of initials, not recognizing that the S. in
Jefferys' volume stood for a title and not a name. Another work
important in its collection of facts bearing upon the general question
of the explorations eastward by the Russians, was published by the
archdeacon of Wilts, Rev. William Coxe in 1780. This was followed by a
second edition during the same year. A third edition accompanied by a
Supplement of 57 pages was printed in 1787 and a fourth in 1803. There
were two apparently distinct translations of the book printed at Paris
in 1781, and a German edition at Frankfurt and Leipzig in 1783. The
third edition which is the best and most correct appeared both in
octavo and quarto form, and is that to which reference is made in this
paper. It is entitled:


"Account of the Russian discoveries between Asia and America. To which
are added the Conquest of Siberia, and the history of the transactions
and commerce between Russia and China, [etc.]. London: T. Cadell,
1787."


410 pp. 8° [or 4°] with four charts and one plate; to which is added,
consecutively paged:


"A comparative view of the Russian discoveries with those made by
Captains Cook and Clerke, and a sketch of what remains to be
ascertained by future navigators. London: T. Cadell, 1787." 3 l. unp.,
417-456 pp. 8°.


The latter was also separately issued. Among the maps contained in this
work of Coxe's are a reduced copy of the general map of Russia issued
by the Imperial Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, 1776, and a chart
of Synd's Voyage toward Chukotski Noss.

The latter is the only chart of Synd's voyage (1764-1768) which is
accessible, and it is vouched for as authentic by Dr. Coxe. Compared
with later charts it is, of course, extremely imperfect yet there is in
it enough resemblance to the truth to enable us to recognize what was
intended in many instances. In the northeastern part of the chart, the
latitudes are exaggerated and the longitudes contracted in a very
erroneous manner. Nevertheless we recognize East Cape, here named
"Prom. Tschukotskoi;" the two islands now called the Diomedes but here
left nameless; a large island, moved eastward out of place, but
doubtless intended for Arakam Island, is called "I. Diomedis;" while
among a crowd of islets (referable to the hills of St. Lawrence Island
seen through a fog and laid down very inaccurately), the name "S.
Diomedis" appears again. The American coast was seen and landed upon;
Cape Prince of Wales and the shore south and east from it are
recognizable. The island of St. Mathew was discovered and named, though
placed a degree too far south. The island of St. Paul in the Pribiloff
group was discovered by Synd, put in its true latitude, and named
Preobrazhenia or Transfiguration Island. It is about seven degrees out
in relative longitude and fourteen in absolute longitude. One cannot
doubt however that it was the island now known as St. Paul when we
recall the fact that there are no other islands than the Pribiloff
group, in that latitude or within that general area of Bering Sea. The
southern Cape of the Chukchi Peninsula, Chukotski Cape of Bering and
Müller is represented two degrees too far south. Preobrazhenia Bay is
not recognizable but the name is transferred to the bight west and
north of Cape Bering of our present charts. This part of the coast was
not however approached by Synd, who spent much time on the coast of
Kamchatka. On his chart this peninsula is represented better than we
should have expected from the rudeness of the rest.

The map of the Academy shows the influence of those who discredited the
near approach of America to eastern Siberia; notwithstanding the
explorations of Deshneff, Gvosdeff and Synd, the American shore of
Bering Strait has disappeared altogether. The eastern portion of the
Chukchi Peninsula is indented by a host of hypothetical inlets, and
defended by an unrecognizable archipelago of nameless islands. The
far-stretching chain of islands, among which Bering's second expedition
was so long entangled, excepting those confirmed by Krenitzen and
Levasheff (who sailed far north of the southern arc of the chain) is
also absent. Excepting that the fictitious peninsula north from Chukchi
land is effaced, the map in its main features for this region is less
accurate than that of Bering, and does not compare very favorably with
that of Müller. And yet but shortly after its publication, the
explorations of Cook and Clerke recorded the facts which should, when
published, exalt the memory of the older geographers and scatter the
hypotheses which for a time prevailed against them.

Their explorations are included in


"A voyage to the Pacific Ocean, undertaken by the command of his
Majesty, for making discoveries in the northern hemisphere, [etc.],
performed under the direction of captains Cook, Clerke and Gore, in his
Majesty's ships the Resolution and Discovery, in the years 1776-1780.
London, for T. Nicol and T. Cadell, 1784-5." 3 volumes 4° and atlas
folio.


This is the edition ordered by the Admiralty. Of this celebrated work,
said to have been written from the explorers' manuscripts by Bishop
Douglas, there have been many editions. In the Bulletin of the Société
de Géographie, Paris, 1879, pp. 481-540, is a bibliography by James
Jackson.

The most interesting points in regard to Cook's explorations about
Bering Strait are comprised on the chart (vol. ii, p. 467) entitled:


"Chart of Norton Sound and of Bherings Strait made by the East Cape of
Asia and the west point of America."


On this chart the main features of the coast on either side of the
strait are correctly indicated, though several of the inlets and bays
are wanting. The Diomedes and Fairway Rock of modern charts are located
but left without names, King's Island is named; Arakam was not
recognized as an island nor was Point Chaplin (Indian Point) observed.
St. Lawrence Island was seen in foggy weather. Its isolated hills
connected by very low flat land led Cook into the error of supposing
that it comprised several islands, one of which he correctly referred
to that named St. Lawrence by Bering and the rest he lumped under the
name of Clerke's Islands. A single fictitious island, midway between
St. Lawrence and King's appears on the chart, but is not named or
mentioned in the text. St. Lawrence Bay is named and discovered. Bering
and Müller's Chukotski cape is correctly identified. East Cape is well
delineated, and the name Serdze Kamen (Heart-Rock) originally given to
a cliff or bluff point at the entrance of Holy Cross Bay is transferred
to a point on the Arctic shore of the peninsula. There is a confused
and somewhat curious history connected with the use of the names
Serdze-Kamen and Chukotski Cape. After the travels of Deshneff, Popoff
and others and the reception at various times of information from the
natives, it was pretty generally understood among the hunters and
traders of this region that the extreme of Asia was a cape or point on
or near which the Chukchi dwelt, or which they described, which was not
definitely located, and which was vaguely known as the Chukchi Cape or
the Cape of the Chukchis, Chukotski Noss in the Russian tongue. Cape
Serdze Kamen will be found on the chart of Billings' Voyage. It was the
point where the Chukchis successfully defended themselves against the
invading Russians who sought to force them to pay tribute. Beyond it,
for the Russians all was mysterious Chukchi country with an unknown
coast. This cape being their _ne plus ultra_ it is probable that it was
more or less confounded by these illiterate and ignorant hunters with
the supposed eastern Cape of Asia, otherwise the Cape of the Chukchis
as used by Müller. Admit this and it is not difficult to frame an
hypothesis which shall account for the confusion, without recourse to
the absurd charges with which Lauridsen attempts to soil the reputation
of Müller, Steller and others.

When Bering named a cape near which he met a baidar-load of Chukchi who
gave him some geographical information (among other things that the
coast made a turn after passing it) he called this cape with great
propriety the Cape of the Chukchis, as observed by Cook (ii, p. 474)
and with no reference to the legendary Cape of the Chukchis above
referred to.

But when Müller and others more familiar with the records of the
earlier explorers came to make maps, they naturally applied the
legendary name to the cape which they supposed to be the eastern end of
Asia, and beyond which the coast makes a turn to the west. Müller
believing in a great cape or peninsula on the northern coast of the
Chukchi country supposed this to be the true Cape Chukotski, and to the
eastern Cape of Bering he left the name of Serdze-Kamen, probably
knowing little about the original Cape Serdze. And as Bering, by the
ambiguity of his journal, gave color to the idea that he had rounded
East Cape and pursued the north coast west of it for a few hours before
turning homeward, what more natural than that those little acquainted
with the region should speak of his turning back from near
Serdze-Kamen? Thus Cook, following out the same idea derived from his
study of the map and journal in Harris, transferred the name to a point
in the latitude at which Bering turned back, on the coast which he
supposed him to have surveyed. There is plenty of confusion here but no
just ground for supposing malice in it.

A publication which throws much light upon Bering's voyage of 1728 was
printed by Vasili Nikolaievich Bergh (or Berkh) a well known writer on
geographical matters in connection with Russian history. It is in the
Russian language and the title may be translated as follows:


First Sea Voyages of the Russians undertaken for the settlement of this
geographical problem--Are Asia and America united?--and performed in
1727, 28 and 29, under the command of fleet captain of the first rank,
Vitus Bering. To which is added a short biographical account of Captain
Bering and some of his officers. St. Petersburg, Academical printing
office, 1823. 8°. 3 pr. l. iv, 126 pp. 1 map. Russian text.


This book was printed, as many private books are, at the printing
office of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, but was not published or
printed by the Academy. The only copies I know of are those in the
library of the Academy and one in the British Museum library, neither
of which I have been able personally to consult. But through the kind
offices of Dr. S. Hertzenstein, of the Zoological Museum of the
Academy, I learn that Bergh found in the Archives of the State
Admiralty Department the logbook of midshipman Peter Chaplin entitled,
"Midshipman Peter Chaplin's journal of the Kamchatka expedition of
1725-1731." From this MSS and from the notes of G. F. Müller and
Admiral Nagaieff, Bergh compiled his work. Chaplin's journal is not
reprinted verbatim but only paraphrased by Bergh who adds his own
commentary on the subject matter, and occasionally gives extracts from
Chaplin whose logbook seems to have been kept in a model way.

An effort will be made to obtain a copy of the original logbook,[7] but
for the present we are obliged to be content with what of authenticity
remains to the data which have been translated or paraphrased by Bergh,
Lauridsen and Olson, necessarily submitting to more or less
modification in the process.